{:title  "CSE 138 Lec1: What is distributed system?"
 :layout :post
 :date   "2023-04-15"
 :tags   ["CSE138" "distributed-systems"]
 :author "Shubham Setia"
 :toc :ul
 :description "Notes on lecture 1 of CSE138 by Lindsey Kuper"}

 ## Introduction
 > What is distributed system?
 
 According to Martin Kleppman a distributed system is a system running on sevral nodes connected via network characterized by partial failure.

 Partial Failure:- Some parts maybe broken but others might be functional.

 We want distributed systems to be fault tolerant, taking advantages of resource parallelisation. But a lot of distributed systems are not fault tolerant. We will learn to design algorithm defensively to guard against these failures.

 ## Failures
 There are two major philosopies for deailing with failures
 > High Performance Computing (HPC) philosophy

* Treat partial failure as total failure
* They checkpoint the result and whenver system is crashed, they start from the last saved checkpoint
 > Cloud Computing philosophy

* Treat partial failure as expected and design systems to work around it.
* "Everything fails all the time" - Wemer Vogels

>                  x?
>             ----------------->
>       M1                          M2
>             <----------------- 
>                   5

Potential Failures when M1 is communicating with M2:
1. Request from M1 gets lost
2. Request from M1 is slow
3. M2 crashes
4. M2 is slow to respond
5. Response from M2 is slow 
6. Response from M2 is lost
7. Corrupt transimission, example:- Byzantine Faults

Important thing to note here is that, if you send request to a node and doesn't receive a response, it's impossible to know why the request failed.

> How do real system cope with this problem?

# Timeouts
After sending the request, wait for a certain amount of time and then assume failure and try again. However this is an imperfect solution.
For example, consider if M1 sends a request to M2 to increment x:

>                  x++
>             ----------------->
>       M1                          M2(x=5)
>                                   x++
>             <-----------------    x=6
>                  x=6

* If timeout is less than amount of time it takes in general, we don't know if increment happened or not.
    - Side effects with timeout can create probelms
    - Uncertainity is the fundamental characterisitc of distributed systems, we should avoid side effects as much as possible.
* Long timeouts can result in increased overhead because we are throttling the amount of work that can be done.
* For short timeouts, we will be making lot more calls for same operation.


If we knew the max delay `d` and processing time `r`, we could set the timeout to `2d + r` and rule out a lot of uncertainty. However, you can’t get an accurate value for `d` and `r` in real life usually. Therefore, distributed systems have to account for both partial failure and unbounded latency (Palvaro's definition of distributed system).

# Why do we need distributed systems?

* we want to make things faster example: Map reduce
* more data than what can be fit in one machine.
* reliability (more copies of same data)
* throughput (data is physically closer)

Watch [Lecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rZPRjLMWOao) here.